\[%settitle Using ISO 3166 Country Codes with FHIR%\]
\[%file newnavbar%\]
&lt;%txheader%&gt;
Using ISO 3166 Country Codes with FHIR
--------------------------------------

|                                                  |                                             |                                                                                      |
|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [\[%wgt vocab%\]](%5B%wg%20vocab%%5D) Work Group | [Maturity Level](versions.html#maturity): 3 | [Standards Status](versions.html#std-process):[Trial Use](versions.html#std-process) |

### Summary

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Source</td>
<td><a href="http://www.iso.org/iso/country_codes.htm">ISO 3166 Home Page</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>System</td>
<td>ISO 3166 is a 3 part standard, each of which defines a code system:
<ul>
<li><code>urn:iso:std:iso:3166</code>: Part 1, Country Codes (2-letter and 3-letter, and numerical codes)</li>
<li><code>urn:iso:std:iso:3166:-2</code>: Part 2, Subdivision (State/Province) Codes</li>
<li><code>urn:iso:std:iso:3166:-3</code>: Part 3, Historical Country Names</li>
</ul>
Note: the URI used for Part 1 would be urn:iso:std:iso:3166:-1 if it were consistent with the other URIs, but urn:iso:std:iso:3166 is used for legacy reasons.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Version</td>
<td>If necessary to exchange the version (see below), use the year of release in the format YYYY</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Code</td>
<td><ul>
<li><code>Part 1</code>: Any of the 2-letter, 3-letter, or numerical country name codes defined in Part 1</li>
<li><code>Part 2</code>: Any of the codes for principal subdivisions (e.g province or state) of countries coded in Part 1</li>
<li><code>Part 3</code>: One of the 4 letter historical country name codes defined in Part 3</li>
</ul>
The codes SHALL always be represented in upper case, but (for robustness) comparisons are case insensitive.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Display</td>
<td>Use the Country or State/Province Name</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Inactive</td>
<td>There are no codes that are inactive</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Subsumption</td>
<td>No Subsumption relationships are defined amongst the Country Codes</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Filter Properties</td>
<td>Regex on code - see below</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Version Issues

A few country codes have been reused (e.g. CS). If a version is needed, simply use the year of publication e.g. 1998.

### Copyright/License Issues

ISO Maintains the copyright on the country codes, and controls it's use carefully. For further details, see the [ISO 3166 Home Page](http://www.iso.org/iso/country_codes.htm)

### ISO-3166 Filter Properties

The Part 1 Code system identified by the URI `urn:iso:std:iso:3166` contains 3 types of codes for country:

-   2-letter
-   3-letter
-   Numeric

In almost all contexts of use, only one of these 3 subsets of codes are used / allowed. Value sets can be defined for these by [enumerating the relevant codes](valueset-definitions.html#ValueSet.compose.include.concept). Alternatively, a regex can be used to define the value set intensionally. For example, this filter specifies only 3 letter codes:

      "filter" : [{
        "property" : "code", 
        "op" : "regex", 
        "value" : "[A-Z]{3}" 
      }]

### Value Sets

This specification defines 3 commonly used value sets for use with ISO 3166 Country Codes:

-   [2 letter Country Codes](valueset-iso3166-1-2.html)
-   [3 letter Country Codes](valueset-iso3166-1-3.html)
-   [Numerical Country Codes](valueset-iso3166-1-N.html)

The latter two value sets are defined intensionally in this specification as a consequence of ISO Intellectual Property Restrictions.

\[%file newfooter%\]
